AIP-4236 - API Versioning for Version-aware clients (#1331)
googleapis/aip: aip/client-libraries/4236.md

---
id: 4236
state: reviewing
created: 2024-05-16
---

# Version-aware clients

APIs can annotate services with [`google.api.api_version`][]. If
`google.api.api_version` is specified, version-aware clients **must**
include the value of `google.api.api_version` in the request to the API.

### Expected Generator and Client Library Behavior

If a service is annotated with `google.api.api_version`, client library
generators **must** include the version in requests sent to the API via

> the HTTP Header `X-Goog-Api-Version`.

Reviewer: Personally I liked the previous sentence that said `A client **may** send it as a query parameter instead`. Any reason why it was removed?

Requests which contain the API version, **must** include either an HTTP query
parameter `$apiVersion` or HTTP header `X-Goog-Api-Version`, but a request
**must not** contain both.

Generated documentation for a given service **may** include the value of
`google.api.api_version`, if it exists in the source protos.

## Rationale

The `google.api.api_version` annotation allows services to abide by the schema and
service behavior at the time the API version was deployed. The format of the
API version **must** be treated as opaque by clients. Generators and clients **must not**

> interpret the value of `google.api.api_version` beyond the uses mentioned above.

Reviewer: The Rationale shouldn't contain guidance, that should be in the guidance section above. Some examples of other Rationale sections include https://google.aip.dev/203#rationale and https://google.aip.dev/202#rationale

These basically answer the questions of "why X guidance?" which come up often after N weeks/months in the wild.

I'd recommend three subsections, one for why clients must do this at all, one for why clients need to treat the value as opaque, and one why both query & header cannot be set at the same time

---
id: 4236

> state: approved

Reviewer: ```suggestion
state: reviewing
```

created: 2024-05-16
---

> # Version-aware clients

Reviewer: I've made a bunch of comments re:guidance appearing in this preamble - perhaps that means the preamble needs to be cut down/generalized/removed/converted into guidance. We don't want to repeat ourselves, we don't want to spread guidance out into various places, and we want to be succinct. Adding a `Rationale` section go/aip/8#rationale is probably where you want to be explaining the "why"

Author: Thanks for reviewing @noahdietz ! Please let me know if this latest version reads better.

Reviewer: I does! A few more tweaks thanks Tony :)

Author: Please could you take another look?

> APIs may choose to annotate services with [google.api.api_version]. If 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
APIs may choose to annotate services with [`google.api.api_version`][]. If 
```

I think we still need the empty `[]` for an implicit link.

Also let's format the annotation name as code, might require updating the definition text as well.

Applies here and throughout.

> APIs may choose to annotate services with [google.api.api_version]. If 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
APIs can annotate services with [google.api.api_version]. If 
```

Don't use requirement words in non-requirement contexts

> [google.api.api_version] is specified, version-aware clients **must** include

Reviewer: Do we *need* to hyperlink every use of `google.api.api_version`?

the value of [google.api.api_version] in the request to the API. This allows
services to abide by the schema and behavior of the service at the time that

> this API version was deployed. The format of the API version must be treated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this API version was deployed. The format of the API version **must** be treated
```

I'm guessing this is a requirement?

> the value of [google.api.api_version] in the request to the API. This allows
> services to abide by the schema and behavior of the service at the time that
> this API version was deployed. The format of the API version must be treated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the value of [google.api.api_version] in the request to the API. The format of the API version must be treated
```

I'd move this sentence into a `Rationale` subheading below - this isn't guidance, it is reasoning

> as opaque by clients. Services may use a format with an apparent structure,
> but clients must not rely on this to determine components within an API version,
> or attempt to construct other valid API versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as opaque by clients. Clients **must not** rely on any apparent format in the value for
any reason.
```

Let's just tighten up the guidance, be a bit more explicit, and explain things more in `Rationale`.

### Expected Generator and Client Library Behavior

If a service is annotated with [google.api.api_version], client library
generators **must** include the version in requests sent to the API via
the HTTP Header `X-Goog-Api-Version`.

> For HTTP Requests, an HTTP Query Parameter `$apiVersion` can be used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For HTTP Requests, an HTTP Query Parameter `$apiVersion` **may** be used
```

instead of the `X-Goog-Api-Version` HTTP header.

> Requests which contain the API version, must include either an HTTP query

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Requests which contain the API version, **must** include either an HTTP query
```

> parameter `$apiVersion` or HTTP header `X-Goog-Api-Version`, but not both.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parameter `$apiVersion` or HTTP header `X-Goog-Api-Version`, but a request
**must not** contain both.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: To guide consistent behavior across languages when user attempts to set a user header of the same key, this could be to override an existing version that ships with client library, or attempting to add this header when server does not opt in for this feature.
Let's state something along the lines of:

```suggestion
Generated client library should not let users override the `X-Goog-Api-Version` HTTP header. This should be regardless if the service is annotated with [google.api.api_version].
```

Reviewer 3: I'd prefer not to add that, personally. There's only so much you can do to protect users who are determined to do weird things. The chances of someone *accidentally* setting that header are very slim - and if someone really wants to do so, they can always send a request directly from an HTTP client. We definitely shouldn't provide any way of specifically overriding the header - but I don't think "code that allows headers to be specified" should be modified to try to prevent this.

Reviewer 2: > There's only so much you can do to protect users who are determined to do weird things.

I agree on this. On the other hand, it also seems valuable to give user usable feedback if we don't intend have this overriden. 

To add a bit context in Java, we already have some logic trying to resolve conflict between internal header set by defaults and user headers. I am inclined to add logic to throw exception when user attempt to add a header with key "x-goog-api-version" ([draft pr](https://github.com/googleapis/sdk-platform-java/pull/2745/files)). Alternative to this is no change to this existing logic, which will throw exception only when internal header has this key (that's when service has a api version). I don't feel too strongly, but the first one gives a bit more consistent feedback.

I realize this is only dealing with an edge case, but also feel that this case is language agnostic, so wanted to check if we want to deal with it consistently across languages.

WDTY?

Reviewer 3: I think if Java wants to attempt to stop the user from doing it, that's fine - I don't think it should be in the AIP.

> Generated documentation for a given service can include the value of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generated documentation for a given service **may** include the value of
```

[google.api.api_version], if it exists in the source protos.

> The format of the API version must be treated as opaque by clients. Generators

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The format of the API version **must** be treated as opaque by clients. Generators
```

> and clients must not use the value of [google.api.api_version] to make decisions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and clients **must not** interpret the value of [google.api.api_version] beyond the uses mentioned above.
```

If a service is annotated with `google.api.api_version`, client library
generators **must** include either an HTTP query parameter `$apiVersion`
or HTTP header `X-Goog-Api-Version`, but a request **must not** contain both.

Generated documentation for a given service **may** include the value of
`google.api.api_version`, if it exists in the source protos.

## Rationale

### Necessity for Versioning

Explicit API versioning using the `google.api.api_version` annotation is essential
for maintaining compatibility between clients and services over time. As services
evolve, their schemas and behaviors may change. By specifying the API version, a
client communicates its expectations to the service. This allows the service to
respond in a manner consistent with the client's understanding, preventing errors
or unexpected results due to incompatible changes.

### Importance of Opaque Treatment

Clients must treat the value of `google.api.api_version` as opaque to ensure robust
compatibility.  This means that the specific format or structure of the version string
should not be parsed or interpreted for any purpose beyond identifying the intended API

> version. By relying on this opaque identifier, clients avoid making assumptions about the

Reviewer: So these first two sentences would be really good in the guidance section e.g.

```
Clients **must** treat the value of `gogle.api.api_version as opaque. Specifically, the value **must not**
be interpreted or parsed in any way.
```

Then this subsection could start:

```
Treating the `google.api.api_version` value as opaque is important to ensuring robust
compatibility guarantees. By relying on....
```

Author: Fixed in a228cba6a2a5a923473d284078e1a6986d144ca5

Generated documentation for a given service **may** include the value of
`google.api.api_version`, if it exists in the source protos.

> Clients must treat the value of `google.api.api_version` as opaque to ensure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clients **must** treat the value of `google.api.api_version` as opaque to ensure
```

robust compatibility.  This means that the specific format or structure of the

> version string should not be parsed or interpreted for any purpose beyond identifying

Reviewer: ```suggestion
version string **must not** be parsed or interpreted for any purpose beyond identifying
```
